This paper explores the multifaceted issues of deepfakes by focusing on its technological detail, applications, and regulatory challenges specifically within the EU AI Act framework. Audio AI and Visual AI are explored for their impact throughout entertainment, advertising, and education to highlight both the benefits and associated risks, ranging from improved accessibility to increasing privacy concerns. The development of deepfakes is discussed in detail by an overview of techniques such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). The dual nature of the deepfakes that pose both positive and negative potential is also explored, discussing applications such as personalized education tools, movie development, political misinformation, and fraud. Several real-world incidents are mentioned to highlight the potential harms. The EU AI Act is evaluated for effectiveness in regulation of deepfakes. The provisions for high-risk Artificial Intelligence applications are criticized, mentioning challenges in enforcing regulations, classifying deepfakes, creator liability, and managing content removal. The thesis emphasizes the urgency of robust ethical guidelines and a comprehensive legal framework to efficiently address the swift development and misapplication of deepfake technology. In conclusion, the thesis advocates for increased global cooperation, ongoing research in malicious deepfake detection, and adaptive policies to promise responsible development of AI and safeguard against deepfake abuse, thus maintaining the protection of fundamental civil rights and public trust.
